19 January 2026

About NEOlyzer

NEOlyzer is a standalone visualization tool for the catalog of known near-Earth asteroids (NEOs).
It was developed by Rob Seaman of the Catalina Sky Survey (https://catalina.lpl.arizona.edu)
with coding by the Claude AI from Anthropic. Architectural choices were generally suggested
by Claude and confirmed by Rob. NEO resource choices, the other way around.

NEOlyzer is available from:

    https://github.com/rlseaman/neolyzer

The source code and various text files will provide context related to this project and its
use of AI coding practices. I am wondering how the AI paradigm (send comments to Rob who will
chat with Claude and push updates) will coexist with the gitmosphere mosh pit (everybody
modifies everything). Neither programming model is prevalent in the Planetary Defense community.

AI coding tools are much more capable in 2026 than they were the last time I checked in on
the options in 2023. Claude Code (https://claude.com/product/claude-code) was used for this
project with a $100/month subscription. You are encouraged to investigate what the competing
AI companies offer, and perhaps more complicated IDE-based tools from third party vendors
that are growing like weeds. Let the buyer beware!

The regular Claude Chat interface was more than sufficient to get to the stage of a
"Minimum Viable Product" (MVP), the goal of "vibe coding" in 2025. I would not be
surprised if vibe coding as a concept becomes passe in 2026.  I can say is that this
experienced, but world-weary programmer found the AI coding paradigm to be very productive.

But I have a hard time imagining how a younger Rob, learning to program in high school,
undergraduate, and into graduate school, would have dealt with such a tool. I very much
suspect I would not have had the discipline necessary to learn the underlying computer
science and systems software architectures, but would have used AI as a crutch.

Note that NEOlyzer itself makes no use of AI or machine learning techniques. It is a capable
plotting layer with many options of map projection, coordinates, source filtering, etc., on
top of a database, with caching of sky coordinates supporting a trade-off between the number
of NEOs plotted and the speed of rendering during animation. The database is as important
as the mapping and I welcome suggestions and corrections related to both.

Rob Seaman

Catalina Sky Survey
Lunar and Planetary Laboratory
University of Arizona

rseaman@arizona.edu
